---
tags:
  - Knowledge
aliases:
  - Elementary Number Theory
---
## 可除性 Divisibility
> [!theorem] Theorem 1.1
> 若$a,b \in \mathbb{Z}$且$b\neq 0$，则有唯一的组合$q,r\in\mathbb{Z}$使得
> $$a=qb+r, (0\leq r<|b|)$$

> [!proof] 
> 集合$S=\{a-nb|n\in\mathbb{Z}\}$包含一些非负整数，则$S\cap\mathbb{N}$有最小元素，即对于所有$q$来说，有$r=a-qb\geq 0$。

**Def 1.3 整除 因数**

If $r=0$, we say that $b$ divides $a$, dented by $b|a$.

In this case, we also say $b$ is a factor of $a$, or $a$ is a multiple of $b$.

Every integers divides $0$.

  

**Prop 1.5**

If $c$ divides $a_1,...,a_k$, then $c$ divides any $\mathbb{Z}$-linear combination of $a_1,...a_k$.

**Pf**

$$\begin{aligned}  

a_i&=b_ic \\

\sum _{i}k_ia_i&=(\sum _ik_ib_i)c \\

\end{aligned}$$

  

**Def 1.6 最大公因数**

If $d|a$ and $d|b$, we say that $d$ is common divisor of $a$ and $b$.

All common divisors of $a$ and $b$ are clearly bounded (unless $a=b=0$). So there is a unique greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$, denoted by $gcd(a,b)$.

  

**Lemma 1.7**

If $a = qb + r$, then $gcd(a,b)=gcd(b,r)$.

**Pf**

Any common divisor of $b$ and $r$ also divides $qb + r = a$; similarly, since $r=a-qb$, a common divisor of $(a,b)$ also divides $r$. So $(a,b)$ and $(b,r)$ have the same common divisors.

  

We can use **Lemma 1.7** repeatedly to compute $gcd(a,b)$ for any integer $a$ and $b$. After ruling out a few trivial cases, we can assume $a>b>0$. By division algorithm, we write $a=q_1b+r_1$. If $r

_1=0$, then $gcd(a,b)=b$ and we are done. Otherwise we write $b=q_2r_1+r_2$. If $r_2=0$, then $gcd(a,b)=r_1$ and we are done. Continue in this fashion, we reach the last two steps $r_{n-3}=q_{n-1}r_{n-2}+r_{n-1}$ with $0<r_{n-1}<r_{n-2}$, and $r_{n-2}=q_nr_{n-1}+r_n$ with $r_n=0$.

  

**Theorem 1.8 (Euclid's Algorithm)**

In the above calculation, we have $gcd(a,b)=r_{n-1}$.

  

**Ex 1.9**

Calculate $gcd(1763,2021)$

**Solve**

辗转相除法

  
  

**Theorem 1.11 (Bezout’s identity)**

If $a,b\in\mathbb{Z}$ not both $0$, then there exist integers $u$ and $v$ such that $gcd(a,b)=au+bv$.

**Pf**

Start from $gcd(a,b)=r_{n-1}=r_{n-3}-q_{n-1}r_{n-2}$, then eliminate $r_{n-2}$ using $r_{n-2}=r_{n-4}-q_{n-2}r_{n-3}$. Working backwards this way until we reach $r_{n-1}=au+bv$ for some integers $u$ and $v$.

  

**Example 1.12**

$43=7\cdot 2021-8\cdot 1763$.

  

**Corollary 1.13**

Suppose that $gcd(a,b)=d$, then an integer $c$ is of the form $ax+by$ for some $x,y\in\mathbb{Z}$ is a multiple of $d$. In particular, $d$ is the least positive integer of such form.

  

**Def 1.14 互质**

Two integers $a$ and $b$ are coprime (or relatively prime) if $gcd(a,b)=1$. More generally, a set of integers $\{a_1,a_2,...\}$ are coprime if $gcd(a_1,a_2,...)=1$. They are called mutually coprime if $\forall i\neq j, gcd(a_i,a_j)=1$ (mutually coprime implies coprime).

  

**Corollary 1.15**

$gcd(a,b)=1$ iff $ax+by=1,\exist x,y\in\mathbb{Z}$.

  

**Corollary 1.16**

For coprime $a,b\in\mathbb{Z}$, we have that: If $a|c$ and $b|c$ then $ab|c$. If $a|bc$, then $a|c$.

**Pf**

$ax+by=1,\exist x,y\in\mathbb{Z},c=au=bv,\therefore c\cdot 1=c(ax+by)=abvx+abuy$, so $ab|c$.

Since $a|bc$, $a|(cax+cby)$.

  

**Def 1.17 最小公倍数**

If $a|c$ and $b|c$, we say that $c$ is a common multiple of $a$ and $b$. The set of all positive common multiples of $a\neq 0$ and $ b\neq 0$ is clearly non-empty and bounded below. So there is a unique least common multiple of $a$ and $b$, denoted by $lcm(a,b)$.

  

**Theorem 1.18**

Let $d=gcd(a,b)$ and $m=lcm(a,b)$, then $dm=ab$.

**Pf**

Let $a=de,b=df$, $\therefore \frac{ab}{d}=\frac{dedf}{d}=def$ is a common multiple of $a$ and $b$. To show it's the least, consider the Bezout identity: $d=au+bv$. We get $\frac{c}{def}=\frac{cd}{dedf}=\frac{cd}{ab}=\frac{c(au+bv)}{ab}=\frac{c}{b}u+\frac{c}{a}v$ is an integer, since $a$ and $b$ are factors of $c$; thus $def|c$ and hence we have $def\leq c$, as required.

  

## 2.Prime Number

**Theorem 2.1**

Let $a$, $b$ and $c$ be integers with $a$ and $b$ not both $0$ and $d=gcd(a,b)$. Then the equation $ax+by=c$ has an integer solution $x,y$ iff $c$ is a multiple of $d$.

  

In this case, there are infinitely many solution: $$x=x_0+\frac{bn}{d}, y=y_0-\frac{an}{d} (n\in\mathbb{Z})$$

where $x_0,y_0$ is any particular solution.

  

**Def 2.2 素数**

An integer $p>1$ is said to be prime iff the only positive divisor of $p$ are $1$ and $p$ itself.

  

**Lemma 2.3**

If $p$ is prime and $p$ divides $a_1...a_n$, then $p$ divides $a_i$ for some $i$.

  

**Theorem 2.4 算数基本定理**

Each integer $n\geq 1$ has a prime power factorization: $$n=p^{e_1}_1...p^{e_k}_k$$ where $p_i$'s are distinct primes and $e_i$'s are positive integers.

  

Moreover, up to permutations of factors, this factorization is unique.

  

**Lemma 2.5**

Suppose that $a_1,...,a_r$ are mutually coprime positive integers. If $a_1,...,a_r$ is an $m$-th power, then each $a_i$ is an $m$-th power.

  

**Corollary 2.6**

If a positive integer $m$ is not a perfect square, then $\sqrt{m}$ is irrational.

  

**Theorem 2.7 (Euclid)**

There are infinitely many primes.

**Pf**

Suppose there are only finitely many primes $p_1,p_2,...,p_k$. Then we consider $n=p_1p_2...p_k+1$. Then $n$ has a prime factor $p$(which is one of $p_i$). We notice $p|p_1...p_k,p|n\Rightarrow p|n-p_1p_2...p_k=1$(contradiction).

  

**Theorem 2.8 (Dirichlet)**

If $gcd(a,b)=1$, then there are infinitely many primes of the form $aq+b$.

  

Let $\pi (x)$ denote the number of primes $p\leq x$.

  

**Theorem 2.10 (Prime Number Theorem)**

$$\lim_{x\rightarrow\infty}\frac{\pi(x)}{\frac{x}{\ln x}}=1$$

  

**Theorem 2.11**

$$\pi(x)=li(x)-\frac{1}{2}li(\sqrt x)+smaller terms$$

  

**Lemma 3.1**

If $2^m+1$ is prime then $m=2^n$ for some integer $n\geq 0$.

  

**Def 3.2**

Numbers of the form $F_n=2^{2^n}+1$ are called Fermat number and those are primes are called Fermat Prime.

Numbers of the form $M_p=2^p-1$ ($p$ is a prime) are called Mersenne number, and those are prime are called Mersenne prime.

<!-- Prime numbers of the form $p(m,n)=2^m\cdot 3^n+1$ -->

  

**Lemma 3.3**

Distinct Fermat numbers are mutually coprime.

  

**Prop 3.5**

If $m>1$ and $a^m-1$ is prime, then $a=2$ and $m$ is prime.

  

## 3.Congruences

### 3.1 Modular Arithmetic

Motivation: want a weaker version of equality.

  

**Def 3.1**

A binary relation $\backsim$ on a set $X$ is said to be an equivalence relation if it is reflexive, symmetric and transitive. That is for all $a,b$ and $c\in X$, we have

- $a\backsim a$

- $a\backsim b$ iff $b\backsim a$

- If $a\backsim b$ and $b\backsim c$ then $a\backsim c$

  

The equivalence class of $a\in X$ under $\backsim$ is define as $$[a]=\{x\in X|x\backsim a\}$$$a$ is called a representative of the class $[a]$.

Clearly $[a]=[b]$ iff $a\backsim b$.

  

$$[a]+[b]=[a+b]$$$$[a]-[b]=[a-b]$$$$[a]\cdot[b]=[a\cdot b]$$

  

**Def 3.2**

Let $n\in\mathbb{N}$ and $a,b\in\mathbb{Z}$. We say $a$ is congruent to $b$ mod if $a$ and $b$ leave the same remainder when divided by $n$. We denote the set of equivalence classes modulo $n$ by $\mathbb{Z}_n$.

  

**Theorem 3.14**

$\mathbb{Z}_n$ under the modular addition and modular multiplication forms a ring.

  

**Def 3.15**

A set of integers, containing one representative from each congruent class, is called a complete set of residue mod $n$.

  

**Lemma 3.17**

For $f\in\mathbb{Z}[x]$, if $a\equiv b\ \mathrm{mod}\ n$, then $f(a)\equiv f(b)\ \mathrm{mod}\ n$.

  

**Theorem 3.21**

There is no non-constant polynomial $f(x)$ with integer coefficients such that $f(x)$ assume prime values at each integer $x$.

  

**Corollary 4.2**

If $gcd(a,n)=1$, then the linear congruence $ax\equiv b\ \mathrm{mod}\ n$ has a unique class of solutions.

  

**Algorithm 4.5**

用引理4.4把$a$降到$1$。

1.计算$d=gcd(a,n)$。如果$d$不能整除$b$，无解。

2.用$d$除$a,b,n$，得到$a'x\equiv b'\ \mathrm{mod}\ n'$；

3.$a''x\equiv b''\ \mathrm{mod}\ n'$；

4.直到$a=0$。

  

**Theorem 4.7 (中国剩余定理 CRT)**

令$n_1,...,n_k$互素，$b_1,...,b_k$为整数，那么$x\equiv b_i\ \mathrm{mod}\ n_i$的解


> [!theorem] 费马小定理 (Fermat's Little Theorem)
> 若$p$为素数，$a$与$p$互质，则$a^{p-1}\equiv 1\ (\text{mod }p)$。